\input texinfo.tex @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@stfilename faq.info
@settitle Frequently asked questions about Dinotrace
@setchapternewpage off
@c $Id$
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@set UPDATED November 1998
@set VERSION 9.0d

@c All functions use these for searching ease
@macro dmenu {f}
@code{\f\}
@end macro

@macro widget {f}
@emph{\f\}
@end macro

@macro resource {f}
@code{\f\}
@end macro

@macro config {f}
@code{\f\}
@end macro

@macro switch {f}
@samp{\f\}
@end macro

@macro prog {f}
@strong{\f\}
@end macro

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@c @finalout
@titlepage
@title Dinotrace FAQ
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author Wilson Snyder   <@email{wsnyder@@ultranet.com}>
@end titlepage

This is a list of frequently asked questions (FAQ) for Dinotrace users.
A hypertext version is available on the World Wide Web at
@uref{http://www.ultranet.com/~wsnyder/veripool/dinotrace/FAQ_toc.html}.

Please send updates and corrections to the FAQ to
@code{wsnyder@@ultranet.com}.

@c ======================================================================
@chapter General Questions

@c --------------------
@section Where can I get the latest version of Dinotrace?

The latest version is Dinotrace @value{VERSION}.  It can be down-loaded
from the veripool, at
@uref{http://www.ultranet.com/~wsnyder/veripool/dinotrace}.

@c --------------------
@section Can I copy Dinotrace?

Dinotrace is covered under two Copyrights.  The latter one is the GNU
Copyleft, which allows free use and modification, provided that you in
turn provide free use and modification to all others that request it.
This is described in the @file{COPYING} distributed with Dinotrace.

Code created before 1998 was Copyrighted by Digital Equipment
Corporation.  Their Copyright also disclaims any warranties, and
disallows reproduction for sale.  Observing the GNU Copyleft should also
cover this Copyright for any software distributed not for a fee.  (The
water is murky if embeding Dinotrace.)

@c --------------------
@section Where should I report bugs and other problems with Dinotrace?

Currently the author is tracking bugs; contact
@email{wsnyder@@ultranet.com}.  There is a Anti-Spam filter on this
account, so be sure you have a valid return address to meet the filter's
challenge.

@c --------------------
@section What other public domain tools work with Dinotrace?

The primary tool you will want are GNU Emacs, with
@file{verilog-mode.el}, @file{dinotrace.el}, and @file{sim-log.el}
installed.  This will let you back annotate the values of signals onto
your source code.

You may also want Verilator, a public domain simulator, and other tools
available at the Veripool.

@c --------------------
@section Will Dinotrace work with Windows NT?

Yes, though it may not have the look and feel you expect.  (Where expect
is defined by Microsoft, not Unix.)  Some consider that a feature.

Read the installation instructions on the Website.  You'll need cygwin,
X11R6, and a X11 server, like Exceed or Excursion.

@c ======================================================================
@chapter On-line Help, Printed Manuals, Other Sources of Help

@c --------------------
@section How do I get a printed copy of the Dinotrace manual?

A PDF file is available at
@uref{http://www.ultranet.com/~wsnyder/veripool/dinotrace/dinotrace.pdf}.
Your web browser should be able to print this, if not you can probably
print the HTML version in the same directory.

The more ambitious can build the manual themselves.  The texinfo source
is included with Dinotrace.  Typing @samp{make dinotrace.dvi} will
create a dvi file that may then be printed with @samp{dvips}.  This will
require @prog{TeX}, @prog{texinfo}, and a bunch of libraries, all good
for a day's worth of downloading.

@c --------------------
@section How do I install a piece of Texinfo documentation?

A info file for Dinotrace comes with the package, @file{dinotrace.info}.
Copy this file to a directory in your info path, usually
@file{/usr/local/info}.  Then edit the master directory, usually
@file{/usr/local/info/dir} to include the line:
@example
  * Dinotrace: (dinotrace).  Signal waveform viewer
@end example

@c ======================================================================
@chapter Common Things People Want To Do 

@c --------------------
@section How do I have dinotrace always display a group of signals together?

Dinotrace doesn't really have the concept of groups yet.  Instead, use
the @config{signal_move} or @config{signal_copy} to accomplish the
desired effect.

For example, if out of a huge trace you want only @samp{foo} and @samp{bar}
to be displayed, put in your @file{dinotrace.dino}:

@example
signal_delete *
signal_add foo 
signal_add bar
@end example

Dinotrace will create similar code for you by selecting the
@dmenu{Customize Save As...} menu option then checking the @widget{Save
signal ordering} box.

@c --------------------
@section How do I make a signal that is a concatenation of other signals?

Dinotrace will only collapse signals with the same basename.  Make
another signal that is a concatenation of the two.

If the signal is never used, then it will be eliminated by Synopsys.  If
you're using Verilint or a similar tool that finds unused nets, you may
want to make another signal, unused_ok, to make it obvious that the net
is fake.  The below example does this.  It uses the weird ORing on
unused_ok so that any number of any width signals can be added in, yet
it will still always hold a constant high.

@example
wire [2:0] first;
wire [7:3] second;
wire [7:0] concatenated_for_dino = @{first, second@};
wire unused_ok = (|@{
                 concatenated_for_dino,
                 1'b1@});
@end example

@c --------------------
@section How do I find the next time a signal changes?

There is no direct way to move to the next edge.  You can see the next
time that the value changes by using @dmenu{Value Examine} or
@kbd{@key{MB2}}, then pan to that point manually or with @widget{Goto}.

@c --------------------
@section How do I make a "register window" with the values at a current time?

Just make a fake Verilog file with the registers laid out in ASCII as
you wish.  Then use the Emacs Dinotrace keys to annotate and manipulate
the values.  You can even have the signals commented out in your normal
module; annotation updates comments too.  (As long as the needed signals
are uncommented elsewhere in the module.)

@c ======================================================================
@chapter Bugs/Problems

@c --------------------
@section How do I get around the "Over maximum of 256 signal states" error message?

You have two basic options.  First, for one hot and similar state
machines, define another less wide signal that is derived from the wide
signal, then apply a @config{signal_state} command to that new signal.

Alternatively, do the decoding in Verilog.  A Configuration Command
@config{signal_radix *_ascii* ascii} with the code below should work:

@example
reg [8*4-1:0] machine_ascii;	// Decoded ascii state of machine
always @@ (/*AUTOSENSE*/machine) begin
   casex (@{machine@})
    4'b0000: machine_ascii = "----";
    4'b1000: machine_ascii = "s0  ";
    4'b0100: machine_ascii = "exit";
    4'b0010: machine_ascii = "stop";
    4'b0001: machine_ascii = "idle";
    default: machine_ascii = "%ERR";
   endcase
end
@end example

@c --------------------
@section Why do I see X's for a bus that isn't all X's?

If a signal value has even a single bit that is X or Z, but isn't
entirely X or Z, then it will be displayed as a X.  You can see the real
value by using @dmenu{Value Examine} or @kbd{@key{MB2}}.

@c --------------------
@section Why does(n't) Dinotrace compress bits into a single vector?

Dinotrace must form all vectors when the trace is being read in.  The
@config{vector_separator} command must be set to the character used to
separate bus bits from the rest of the signal name.  If you don't want
bits to be collapsed to vectors, just set it to some character that
doesn't occur in signal names, like @kbd{@@}.

@c --------------------
@section Why doesn't a signal appear in Dinotrace?

Check first that it is really in the trace.  The @prog{strings} program
will find signal names in every format that Dinotrace supports.

If the signal exists in the trace, it may have been deleted by a configuration
command.  Use the @dmenu{Signal Select} popup to add all signals, then
use @dmenu{Signal Search} to find it.

In Verilog DMP files, if a identical signal exists at many levels of
hierarchy, only the top level signal will exist.  If your naming
convention is sane, and doesn't change names at hierarchy boundaries,
you still should find the signal, just with a different hierarchy in
front of the base signal name.  Furthermore, signals with over 1024 bits
are dropped, since they would take too much space on the screen.

A bug is not impossible either, though usually Dinotrace manages to eek
out a warning message when it is about to loose a signal.

@c --------------------
@section Why doesn't a signal I can see in Dinotrace appear in the annotation?

Under the @dmenu{Value Annotate} is a option menu which chooses which
signals are included in the annotation.  By default, deleted signals
aren't included.  Often signals that are constant through the whole
trace are deleted, and thus don't get included in the annotation.
Change the option to include deleted signals, or add the needed signals
back.

@c --------------------
@section Why do I get the wrong value for a annotated signal?

Because you know more then Emacs.  (At least for the time being.)  Emacs
simply does a search and replace for the signal name, totally ignoring
the bus bits, module name, and hierarchy.

First off, this means bus subscripts are ignored.  The traced signal
@samp{foo[5:0]=6'b101010} when annotating @samp{foo[5]} will show the
value of the whole vector, not just bit 5: @samp{foo`101010'[5]}.

Furthermore, having multiple signals with the same name will confuse
things, as the hierarchy isn't known.  If the trace has the signals
@samp{a.foo[5:2]} and @samp{b.foo[5:2]} with different values, and the
code references foo, you could get either the a or b version.  Your best
bet is to delete the signals that don't apply to the module you are
annotating.  (If a signal like the clock is in many modules, but identical,
there's nothing to worry about.)

@c ======================================================================
@chapter Suggestions

@c --------------------
@section Can Dinotrace directly read VCD+/VPD format files?

Nope, sorry.  VCD+ is a proprietary format, and the reading code must be
licensed for a fee before being used.  This is obviously not possible with
the distribution philosophy of Dinotrace.

You can however convert VCD+ files on the fly using vpd2vcd.  See the
documentation for details.

@c --------------------
@section I'd like Dinotrace to...

Send a note to the author, I'll see what I can do.  As my time is
limited, consider using the force, and editing the source.

@c ======================================================================
@contents
@bye
